Pictures of Tanishi and MeMy 4-year-old angel came running to me, asked me to play with her for a while.
“Papa, tell me what stuff means and something means.” Cannot help evade a cute curious face, I said, “I am working on Neural Network.” Before I finish the statement, “Papa, What is a Meural Metark?” I gave up my stubbornness of avoiding her.
With a smile, I said slowly, “Its Neu — ral Net — work” She asked, “Papa, What is Meu-ral Met-ark?” Papa, What is a Neural Network?At the back of my head, thoughts of me taking days to comprehend what a NN (short for Neural Network) is, how it would work, where it is used, how it is simulating our human brain’s inner workings were going through.
“Neural Network is a collection (a network) of neurons whose job is to learn a new thing or a new place or a new process or a new concept.” It would be stupid on my part to start with a definition of Neural Network like how we used to teach adults in college.
Asked her to draw a dog out of it.
I said, “Good Job!” and asked her, “Where’s the tail, baby?” She smiled and drew a tail.
After all, neural network inside our brain helps us to learn new things in our life.
What I was actually doing here was teaching her neural network (brain) the features of a lion like exactly how Machine Learning Engineers would train the machine to learn new features.
After telling her the features of a lion, asked her “Can you draw these for me?” She happily drew almost a similar figure to that of a dog she drew before.
Now, we need to know the difference between a dog and a lion.
A big beard is the main difference between a lion and a dog.
A dog will have features like face, body, legs, and tail.
A lion will have features like face, body, legs, tail and a beard.
Her neural network got aligned with classifying Dogs and Lions after some training.
Picture of Dog and Lion with featuresShe was happy and there was the neural network functioning concept that still remained to be taught to her.
Do you know what is the difference between a lion and a dog?” She said, “Yes.” I said, “This is called Learning.
How you learnt it is because of Neural Network inside your brain.” Now, a neural network is a collection of neurons that keeps switching on and off based on things you see, feel, hear and think just like switching on light bulb at our home.
Picture of my version of Neural Network with their Neuron friends“Your brain is here inside our head.
This is lion and so on.’ Every neuron would’ve seen, or heard, or smelled, or tasted certain features.
For example, when I showed you a lion picture, your brain asked the neurons who had seen it before.
The neurons grouped together with features like face, body, legs, tail and a beard forms a lion.
Once all the features are there, the neurons will send a signal that the picture you are looking at is a lion and not a dog.
Every neuron will tune itself to pick up certain features like legs, tail, face, beard, and so on.
Ultimately, the neurons in your brain tell that it is a lion and not a dog.
In a few milliseconds, your brain identifies whether the picture is a lion or a dog.
Neurons work together in finding patterns and once a pattern is identified, it signals the brain that it is a thing, place, song, taste, smell and so on.” It was the time to test her understanding.
When I ask you to draw a dog, what are the features there?
So, the face has got eyes, nose and mouth as features.
Me: So, for a dog, the features are face, body, legs and tail.
Do you understand what are the features now for a dog?
Tanishi: Face, body, legs and tail Me: Amazing baby.
If I ask you to draw a lion, what are the features?
So, neurons are inside our brain waiting for features.
Once the features are seen and a logical connection is established, neurons signals your brain that it is a lion.
All neurons work together like your friends and identify lion and dog.
So, this group of neuron friends is called as Neural Network.
Neural network is a group of neuron friends identifying lions and dogs.